<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6: A Chapter in Which They Adore Each Other</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="volume-1" epub:type="volume">
			<section id="book-1-3" epub:type="part">
				<section id="chapter-1-3-6" epub:type="chapter">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="z3998:roman ordinal">VI</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">A Chapter in Which They Adore Each Other</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p>Chat at table, the chat of love; it is as impossible to reproduce one as the other; the chat of love is a cloud; the chat at table is smoke.</p>
					<p>Fameuil and Dahlia were humming. Tholomyès was drinking. Zéphine was laughing, Fantine smiling, Listolier blowing a wooden trumpet which he had purchased at Saint-Cloud.</p>
					<p>Favorite gazed tenderly at Blachevelle and said:⁠—</p>
					<p>“Blachevelle, I adore you.”</p>
					<p>This called forth a question from Blachevelle:⁠—</p>
					<p>“What would you do, Favorite, if I were to cease to love you?”</p>
					<p>“I!” cried Favorite. “Ah! Do not say that even in jest! If you were to cease to love me, I would spring after you, I would scratch you, I should rend you, I would throw you into the water, I would have you arrested.”</p>
					<p>Blachevelle smiled with the voluptuous self-conceit of a man who is tickled in his self-love. Favorite resumed:⁠—</p>
					<p>“Yes, I would scream to the police! Ah! I should not restrain myself, not at all! Rabble!”</p>
					<p>Blachevelle threw himself back in his chair, in an ecstasy, and closed both eyes proudly.</p>
					<p>Dahlia, as she ate, said in a low voice to Favorite, amid the uproar:⁠—</p>
					<p>“So you really idolize him deeply, that Blachevelle of yours?”</p>
					<p>“I? I detest him,” replied Favorite in the same tone, seizing her fork again. “He is avaricious. I love the little fellow opposite me in my house. He is very nice, that young man; do you know him? One can see that he is an actor by profession. I love actors. As soon as he comes in, his mother says to him: ‘Ah! Mon Dieu! my peace of mind is gone. There he goes with his shouting. But, my dear, you are splitting my head!’ So he goes up to rat-ridden garrets, to black holes, as high as he can mount, and there he sets to singing, declaiming, how do I know what? So that he can be heard downstairs! He earns twenty sous a day at an attorney’s by penning quibbles. He is the son of a former precentor of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas. Ah! he is very nice. He idolizes me so, that one day when he saw me making batter for some pancakes, he said to me: ‘Mamselle, make your gloves into fritters, and I will eat them.’ It is only artists who can say such things as that. Ah! he is very nice. I am in a fair way to go out of my head over that little fellow. Never mind; I tell Blachevelle that I adore him⁠—how I lie! Hey! How I do lie!”</p>
					<p>Favorite paused, and then went on:⁠—</p>
					<p>“I am sad, you see, Dahlia. It has done nothing but rain all summer; the wind irritates me; the wind does not abate. Blachevelle is very stingy; there are hardly any green peas in the market; one does not know what to eat. I have the spleen, as the English say, butter is so dear! And then you see it is horrible, here we are dining in a room with a bed in it, and that disgusts me with life.”</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
