<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6: The Grass Covers and the Rain Effaces</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="volume-5" epub:type="volume">
			<section id="book-5-9" epub:type="part">
				<section id="chapter-5-9-6" epub:type="chapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">
						<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
						<span epub:type="subtitle">The Grass Covers and the Rain Effaces</span>
					</h4>
					<p>In the cemetery of Père-Lachaise, in the vicinity of the common grave, far from the elegant quarter of that city of sepulchres, far from all the tombs of fancy which display in the presence of eternity all the hideous fashions of death, in a deserted corner, beside an old wall, beneath a great yew tree over which climbs the wild convolvulus, amid dandelions and mosses, there lies a stone. That stone is no more exempt than others from the leprosy of time, of dampness, of the lichens and from the defilement of the birds. The water turns it green, the air blackens it. It is not near any path, and people are not fond of walking in that direction, because the grass is high and their feet are immediately wet. When there is a little sunshine, the lizards come thither. All around there is a quivering of weeds. In the spring, linnets warble in the trees.</p>
					<p>This stone is perfectly plain. In cutting it the only thought was the requirements of the tomb, and no other care was taken than to make the stone long enough and narrow enough to cover a man.</p>
					<p>No name is to be read there.</p>
					<p>Only, many years ago, a hand wrote upon it in pencil these four lines, which have become gradually illegible beneath the rain and the dust, and which are, today, probably effaced:</p>
					<blockquote class="inscription">
						<p xml:lang="fr">Il dort. Quoique le sort fût pour lui bien étrange,<br/>
						Il vivait. Il mourut quand il n’eut plus son ange.<br/>
						La chose simplement d’elle-même arriva,<br/>
						Comme la nuit se fait lorsque le jour s’en va.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a></p>
					</blockquote>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
